rm: Add documentation for event queues (#357)
foundriesio/docs: source/reference-manual/factory/event-queues.rst

.. _ref-event-queues:

Event Queues
============

The FoundriesFactory API_ exposes everything about a Factory. In fact,
app.foundries.io and fioctl_ are both built on top of that API. While
this API is fully functional, it can be hard for certain operators to
build their custom tooling for large numbers of devices if they
must constantly poll the API for information. Event queues were
designed to solve this issue.

Event queues provide a way for customers to receive messages about
important events that aren't easy to poll for. These include things
like:

>  * The first time a device connects to the device gateway.

Author: 9136821d8bc19175dc11ca56e0ee0ed9bcf47b0b

 * When a device applies a configuration change.
 * When an OTA starts and completes.

> Event queues are implemented on Google's PubSub_ to provide customers

Author: 64ec84ad580ac44f1123ed5bebd4ca07ad870565

with a well understood and tested framework. There are two types
of event queues that can be created:

>  * Push - Works like a traditional webhook service. Events are sent

Author: 64ec84ad580ac44f1123ed5bebd4ca07ad870565

   to a URL managed by the customer where they can ingest events.

>  * Pull - Works like a tradition message queue system where the

Author: 445e50b2466d43bdbe1abe1d789cc260fdc9498e

code from your laptop::

 # Start ngrok
 $ ngrok http 8080
 # make note of the "Forwarding                    https:..."
 # This URL is required for the JWT_AUDIENCE below

 # From another terminal:
 # Install required python dependencies:
 $ python3 -m venv /tmp/venv
 $ /tmp/venv/bin/pip3 install cryptography requests pyjwt
 $ JWT_AUDIENCE=<ngrok url> /tmp/venv/bin/python3 push_queue_example.py

Once the server is running, you can create a push queue with::

 $ fioctl event-queues mk-push docs-push <ngrok URL from above>

At this point events will start showing up in the example server.

Push Queue Payloads
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Incoming HTTP requests will look similar to::

  {
   "message": {
     "attributes": {
       "event-type":"DEVICE_FIRST_SEEN"
     },
     "data":"aGVsbG9fd29ybGQ=",  # base64 encoded Event payload
     "messageId":"4292351872734735",
     "message_id":"4292351872734735",
     "publishTime":"2022-03-30T15:18:21.095Z",
     "publish_time":"2022-03-30T15:18:21.095Z"
   },
   "subscription":"projects/osf-prod/subscriptions/xxxxxxxx"
  }

Push Queue Security
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Incoming requests will include a header, ``Authorization: Bearer <jwt>``.

> This JWT is signed by one of Google's published `public keys`_.

Author: I should say signed by one of "Google's published keys". It's asymmetric encryption and google publishes their public keys.

There is no user provided key. Google does the encryption.

> This JWT is signed by one of Google's published `public keys`_.

Author: b7730120e52f434295b42d3e34de3bda41d840bb

> This JWT is signed by one of Google's published `public keys`_.

Reviewer: This auth schema guarantees that a request is coming from GC PubSub. But when GC PubSub is used in multi-tenant manner how to guarantee that a request (webhook) intended for one customer is not sent to and authorized by another customer.

Anyway, it's not related to the doc itself.

> This JWT is signed by one of Google's published `public keys`_.

Author: > how to guarantee that a request (webhook) intended for one customer is not sent to and authorized by another customer.

Each tenant has their own queue. We create IAM rules that isolate their service accounts to only have access to topic. Then our publishing code (like the rest of our solution) has to handle multiple tenants correctly.

> This JWT is signed by one of Google's published `public keys`_.

Reviewer: I understand that. But mechanism itself is not protected from incorrect implementation or malicious user on our/publishing side :).

> The JWT audience header is set to the URL you specified when creating

Author: I include an example source file that does that

the push queue. The `example push queue`_ includes logic for validating
this header.

Event Types
-----------

DEVICE_FIRST_SEEN
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
::

 {
   "Uuid": <string: DEVICE_UUID>,
   "Time": <integer: unix seconds>
 }

DEVICE_CONFIG_APPLIED
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
::

 {
   "Uuid": <string: DEVICE_UUID>,
   "Time": <integer: unix seconds>
 }

DEVICE_OTA_STARTED
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
::

 {
   "Uuid": <string: DEVICE_UUID>,
   "Time": <integer: unix seconds>,
   "Target": <string: target name>,
   "Id": <string: update correlation-id> # works with `fioctl devices updates show <id>`
 }

DEVICE_OTA_COMPLETED
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
::

 {
   "Uuid": <string: DEVICE_UUID>,
   "Time": <integer: unix seconds>,
   "Target": <string: target name>,
   "Id": <string: update correlation-id>,

>    "Success": <boolean>

Reviewer: Maybe we should add a reason of an update failure as well as a cause that trigerred an update (e.g. sync, force update, just regular update, etc)

.. _ref-event-queues:

Event Queues
============

The FoundriesFactory API_ exposes everything about a Factory. In fact,
app.foundries.io and fioctl_ are both built on top of that API. While
this API is fully functional, it can be hard for certain operators to
build their custom tooling for large numbers of devices if they
must constantly poll the API for information. Event queues were
designed to solve this issue.

Event queues provide a way for customers to receive messages about
important events that aren't easy to poll for. These include things
like:

 * The first time a device connects to the :ref:`device gateway <ref-ota-architecture>`.
 * When a device applies a configuration change.
 * When an OTA update starts and completes.

> Event queues are implemented using Google PubSub_ to provide customers
> with a well understood and tested framework. There are two types

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Event queues are implemented using Google PubSub_ to provide
a well understood and tested framework. There are two types
```
No need to specify customers given the context.

of event queues that can be created:

 * Push - Works works as a webhook_ service. Events are sent

>    to a URL managed by the customer where they can process events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   to a managed URL where they can be processed.
```
Events already referenced within sentence

>  * Pull - Works like a typical message queue system where the
>    customer can write their own client to receive and process events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * Pull - Works like a typical message queue system where one
   can write their own client to receive and process events.
```

PubSub documentation includes a very useful guide_ to help decide
which approach will work best for you. They also include a wide
range of `client libraries`_ for consuming the Pull API. PubSub

> Subscriptions are created with default retention, expiration,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
subscriptions are created with default retention, expiration,
```

and acknowledgement values_.

Implementation Details
----------------------

Each FoundriesFactory is given a single PubSub Topic. Each Push
and Pull queue created by a customer results in the creation of

> a PubSub Subscription. The FoundriesFactory API just provides a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a PubSub Subscription. The FoundriesFactory API provides a
```
Just can be excluded without lose of meaning.

thin, multi-tenant friendly wrapper to manage everything.

Creating a Pull Queue
---------------------
A pull queue can be created using fioctl::

 # fioctl event-queues mk-pull <name> <where to save creds-file>
 $ fioctl event-queues mk-pull docs-example $HOME/.fio-pull-queue.creds

Fioctl can also monitor this queue::

 $ fioctl event-queues listen docs-example $HOME/.fio-pull-queue.creds

This command also serves as a reference example_ of how to implement
a pull queue listener.

Creating a Push Queue
---------------------

A push queue requires a little up front work:

 * Having an internet facing server to run the webhook service.
 * Authenticating incoming requests.

Quick Start Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> A great way to prototype a push queue by using ngrok_. This tool allows

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A great way to prototype a push queue is by using ngrok_. This tool allows
```

 * When a device applies a configuration change.
 * When an OTA update starts and completes.

Event queues are implemented using Google PubSub_ to provide customers
with a well understood and tested framework. There are two types
of event queues that can be created:

>  * Push - Works works as a webhook_ service. Events are sent

Author: 66bfd8e4c020fa3021b4f800dc9d8342ffc81a6a
